PHIL 102 Paper 1 Draft 1
========================

In his Republic[^1], Plato attempted to define what he considered to be
philosophy by placing all possible kinds of knowledge onto a divided line, with
true knowledge at one extreme, abject ignorance at the other, and everything
non-certain in between.[^2] This explicit categorization notably places science
and mathematics into the latter section, somewhere between opinion and truth,
and thereby seems to claim that they cannot yield actual knowledge but rather
mere opinion.

Plato takes as self evident that "what fully is, is fully knowable, and what in
no way is, is altogether unknowable."[^3] However, it is clear that there are
many things that we consider to exist that are not fully and unobjectionably
knowable. Beliefs about such things as the beauty of particular objects or
people under particular circumstances can be fickle and arbitrary. He argues
that therefore these cannot be considered to be either true knowledge or
ignorance, but something else entirely that is between the two - opinion, the
pale shadow of knowledge that is directed towards things that neither fully
exist nor are fully non-existent.

This assertion relies on there actually being something that can be considered
to exist completely and unambiguously. According to Plato, only his idea of
abstract Forms meet that standard. One may argue whether any one thing is
beautiful and to what degree, but Beauty itself simply is. His ideal philosopher
would seek to understand Beauty, not beautiful things, and only thereafter could
anything meaningful be said of those particulars.

He continues by raising an important distinction regarding the nature of a Form
through the example of mathematics. A geometer may draw circles and lines in
their[^4] work, yet refer not to these drawings in their proofs but to the ideal
conception of circle and line.[^5] Nonetheless, these are not considered to be
Forms. They are clearly closer to truth than opinion, but are derived from
observations of natural things; the conclusions from hypotheses arising from
such activities can only move downward on Plato's line, not up. From mathematics
or physics one cannot derive the first principle of all that exists.

This last point is the critical one in Plato's consideration of all sciences.
Only through facts that can be discovered "without the use of anything visible
at all,"[^6] which correspond to his Forms, could one hope to arrive at a first
principle. While the merit of this claim is well beyond the scope of this paper,
it is clear that Plato did not believe that real knowledge could be gained from
science. Although he did place it above that of simple opinion, it is, in
Glaucon's words, "reasoning but not understanding, reasoning being midway
between opinion and understanding."[^7]

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1]: Plato, *The Republic*, as translated by G.M.A. Grube (Indianapolis: Hacket Publishing, 1974), V, 474b-480a

[^2]: Ibid., 509d

[^3]: Ibid., 477a

[^4]: <https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/their>, viz definition 2 
      -> 'Belonging to or associated with a person of unspecified sex.'

[^5]: Plato, *The Republic*, 510d

[^6]: Ibid., 511c

[^7]: Ibid.
